INTRODUCTION
After reading these instructions you will be able create an object with Lego pieces that resembles the letter “J”. It is intended to get the individual familiar with Lego pieces and how they connect together.  This is for beginners and does not require any previous experience with Lego.  Lego is a very popular children’s toy and there are very elaborate designs which are fun and challenging to complete. For the purposes of these instructions, the Lego pieces will be defined by color and number of pins.  Pins is the part of the Lego that connects them together.  The term block will be used to describe Lego pieces that are already assembled (either partially or fully).  

MATERIALS
•	3 1x4 pin blue Lego piece
•	1 1x4 pin white Lego piece
•	1 1x4 pin yellow Lego piece
•	1 1x4 pin ½ depth green Lego piece
•	1 1x3 pin blue Lego piece
•	1 1x3 pin yellow Lego piece
•	2 2x3 pin yellow Lego piece
•	1 2x3 pin red Lego piece
•	1 2x4 pin light blue Lego piece


STEPS
It will take three phases to complete this Lego piece. The three phases are: Creating the Base, Creating the Top Line of the “J”, and Creating the Bottom Line of the “J”.
Creating the Base
1.	Connect one of the 1x3 pin yellow Lego pieces to one of the 1x3 pin red Lego pieces with the yellow piece on the bottom.  These pieces should be perfectly aligned.
2.	 Connect one of the 1x3 pin yellow Lego pieces to the 2x4 pin light blue Lego piece with the yellow piece on the bottom. 



3.	Align the two assembled Lego blocks close together so that the 2x4 pin light blue Lego piece is touching the 2x3 pin red Lego piece.  The block with the red Lego piece will be horizontally aligned, while the block with the blue Lego piece will be vertically aligned. The assembled blocks will be right aligned with each other. 
4.	Connect one of the 1x4 pin blue Lego pieces on top of the 2x4 pin light blue Lego piece. The 1x4 pin blue Lego will take up 3 pins of the light blue Lego and it is right aligned.
5.	Connect the 1x4 pin blue Lego piece, that you used in step 4, on top of the yellow and red Lego blocks that were assembled in step 1.  It will be bottom and right aligned on the red piece.  
6.	Connect the 1x4 pin white Lego piece in a similar manner as described in step 5, however, place it directly left of the 1x4 pin blue Lego piece that was used in step 5.
Creating the Top Line of the “J”
1.	Connect one of the 1x4 pin blue Lego pieces horizontally across the top of the Lego block that was created in step one.  This Lego piece will be top and left aligned and will take up 3 pins of the 2x3 pin red Lego piece.
Note: Recall that the Lego block that was created in step 1 was the 2x3 pin yellow Lego piece and the 2x3 pin red Lego piece assembled together.   
2.	Connect one of the 1x4 pin blue Lego pieces horizontally across the top of the Lego block that was created in step 1.  This Lego piece will be top and right aligned with Lego black assembled in step 1. It will take up 1 pin of the 2x3 pin red Lego piece.  
3.	Connect the 1x4 pin ½ depth green Lego piece to the bottom of the 1x4 pin blue Lego piece that was attached in step 2. The 1x4 pin ½ depth green Lego will have one pin showing to the right side.  

Caution: This Lego piece may seem unnecessary. However, it strengthens the Lego block so that it does not fall apart. So, please do not omit this step.  

Creating the Bottom Line of the “J”
1.	Connect the 1x3 pin yellow Lego piece horizontally on the bottom of the 2x4 pin light blue Lego piece.  This Lego piece will be bottom and right aligned.  There will be one of the yellow pins extending out to the left.
2.	Connect the 1x4 pin yellow Lego piece to the bottom of the extended 1x3 pin yellow Lego piece that was assembled in step 1.  This Lego piece is right aligned.   
3.	Connect the 1x3 pin blue Lego piece on top of the 1x4 pin yellow Lego piece that you assembled in step 2.  They should be perfectly aligned.  


CONCLUSION
The finished product should resemble the letter “J”.  Please see Figure 1 to see completed figure.  





Figure 1: Assembled Letter “J” from Lego
Source: [Primary]

Make sure all of the pieces are securely attached if the assembled “J” is falling apart.  For further help, please visit Lego’s website at https://www.lego.com/en-us. Their website contains many useful tips for assembling Lego pieces.  These instructions should provide the basics of how to use Lego pieces and provide the experience to tackle larger Lego projects.

  
